Data Manipulation The previous chapter discussed how to create tables and other structures to hold your data. Now it is time to fill the tables with data. This chapter covers how to insert, update, and delete table data. The chapter after this will finally explain how to extract your long-lost data from the database. Inserting Data inserting INSERT When a table is created, it contains no data. The first thing to do before a database can be of much use is to insert data. Data is inserted one row at a time. You can also insert more than one row in a single command, but it is not possible to insert something that is not a complete row. Even if you know only some column values, a complete row must be created. To create a new row, use the command. The command requires the table name and column values. For example, consider the products table from : CREATE TABLE products ( product_no integer, name text, price numeric ); An example command to insert a row would be: INSERT INTO products VALUES (1, 'Cheese', 9.99); The data values are listed in the order in which the columns appear in the table, separated by commas. Usually, the data values will be literals (constants), but scalar expressions are also allowed. The above syntax has the drawback that you need to know the order of the columns in the table. To avoid this you can also list the columns explicitly. For example, both of the following commands have the same effect as the one above: INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price) VALUES (1, 'Cheese', 9.99); INSERT INTO products (name, price, product_no) VALUES ('Cheese', 9.99, 1); Many users consider it good practice to always list the column names. If you don't have values for all the columns, you can omit some of them. In that case, the columns will be filled with their default values. For example: INSERT INTO products (product_no, name) VALUES (1, 'Cheese'); INSERT INTO products VALUES (1, 'Cheese'); The second form is a PostgreSQL extension. It fills the columns from the left with as many values as are given, and the rest will be defaulted. For clarity, you can also request default values explicitly, for individual columns or for the entire row: INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price) VALUES (1, 'Cheese', DEFAULT); INSERT INTO products DEFAULT VALUES; You can insert multiple rows in a single command: INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price) VALUES (1, 'Cheese', 9.99), (2, 'Bread', 1.99), (3, 'Milk', 2.99); It is also possible to insert the result of a query (which might be no rows, one row, or many rows): INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price) SELECT product_no, name, price FROM new_products WHERE release_date = 'today'; This provides the full power of the SQL query mechanism ( ) for computing the rows to be inserted. When inserting a lot of data at the same time, consider using the command. It is not as flexible as the command, but is more efficient. Refer to for more information on improving bulk loading performance. Updating Data updating UPDATE The modification of data that is already in the database is referred to as updating. You can update individual rows, all the rows in a table, or a subset of all rows. Each column can be updated separately; the other columns are not affected. To update existing rows, use the command. This requires three pieces of information: The name of the table and column to update The new value of the column Which row(s) to update Recall from that SQL does not, in general, provide a unique identifier for rows. Therefore it is not always possible to directly specify which row to update. Instead, you specify which conditions a row must meet in order to be updated. Only if you have a primary key in the table (independent of whether you declared it or not) can you reliably address individual rows by choosing a condition that matches the primary key. Graphical database access tools rely on this fact to allow you to update rows individually. For example, this command updates all products that have a price of 5 to have a price of 10: UPDATE products SET price = 10 WHERE price = 5; This might cause zero, one, or many rows to be updated. It is not an error to attempt an update that does not match any rows. Let's look at that command in detail. First is the key word UPDATE followed by the table name. As usual, the table name can be schema-qualified, otherwise it is looked up in the path. Next is the key word SET followed by the column name, an equal sign, and the new column value. The new column value can be any scalar expression, not just a constant. For example, if you want to raise the price of all products by 10% you could use: UPDATE products SET price = price * 1.10; As you see, the expression for the new value can refer to the existing value(s) in the row. We also left out the WHERE clause. If it is omitted, it means that all rows in the table are updated. If it is present, only those rows that match the WHERE condition are updated. Note that the equals sign in the SET clause is an assignment while the one in the WHERE clause is a comparison, but this does not create any ambiguity. Of course, the WHERE condition does not have to be an equality test. Many other operators are available (see ). But the expression needs to evaluate to a Boolean result. You can update more than one column in an UPDATE command by listing more than one assignment in the SET clause. For example: UPDATE mytable SET a = 5, b = 3, c = 1 WHERE a 0; Deleting Data deleting DELETE So far we have explained how to add data to tables and how to change data. What remains is to discuss how to remove data that is no longer needed. Just as adding data is only possible in whole rows, you can only remove entire rows from a table. In the previous section we explained that SQL does not provide a way to directly address individual rows. Therefore, removing rows can only be done by specifying conditions that the rows to be removed have to match. If you have a primary key in the table then you can specify the exact row. But you can also remove groups of rows matching a condition, or you can remove all rows in the table at once. You use the command to remove rows; the syntax is very similar to the command. For instance, to remove all rows from the products table that have a price of 10, use: DELETE FROM products WHERE price = 10; If you simply write: DELETE FROM products; then all rows in the table will be deleted! Caveat programmer. Updating and Deleting Temporal Data Special syntax is available to update and delete from application-time temporal tables (see ). (No extra syntax is required to insert into them: the user just provides the application time values like any other column.) When updating or deleting, the user can target a specific portion of history. Only rows overlapping that history are affected, and within those rows only the targeted history is changed. If a row contains more history beyond what is targeted, its application time is reduced to fit within the targeted portion, and new rows are inserted to preserve the history that was not targeted. Recall the example table from , containing this data: product_no | price | valid_at ------------+-------+------------------------- 5 | 5.00 | [2020-01-01,2022-01-01) 5 | 8.00 | [2022-01-01,) 6 | 9.00 | [2021-01-01,2024-01-01) A temporal update might look like this: UPDATE products FOR PORTION OF valid_at FROM '2023-09-01' TO '2025-03-01' SET price = 12.00 WHERE product_no = 5; That command will update the second record for product 5. It will set the price to 12.00 and the application time to [2023-09-01,2025-03-01) . Then, since the row's application time was originally [2022-01-01,) , the command must insert two temporal leftovers : one for history before September 1, 2023, and another for history since March 1, 2025. After the update, the table has four rows for product 5: product_no | price | valid_at ------------+-------+------------------------- 5 | 5.00 | [2020-01-01,2022-01-01) 5 | 8.00 | [2022-01-01,2023-09-01) 5 | 12.00 | [2023-09-01,2025-03-01) 5 | 8.00 | [2025-03-01,) 6 | 9.00 | [2021-01-01,2024-01-01) The new history could be plotted as in . Temporal Update Example Similarly, a specific portion of history may be targeted when deleting rows from a table. In that case, the original rows are removed, but new temporal leftovers are inserted to preserve the untouched history. The syntax for a temporal delete is: DELETE FROM products FOR PORTION OF valid_at FROM '2021-08-01' TO '2023-09-01' WHERE product_no = 5; Continuing the example, this command would delete two records. The first record would yield a single temporal leftover, and the second would be deleted entirely. The rows in the table would now be: product_no | price | valid_at ------------+-------+------------------------- 5 | 5.00 | [2020-01-01,2021-08-01) 5 | 12.00 | [2023-09-01,2025-03-01) 5 | 8.00 | [2025-03-01,) 6 | 9.00 | [2021-01-01,2024-01-01) The new history could be plotted as in . Temporal Delete Example Instead of using the FROM ... TO ... syntax, temporal update/delete commands can also give the targeted range/multirange directly, inside parentheses. For example: DELETE FROM products FOR PORTION OF valid_at ('[2028-01-01,)') ... . This syntax is required when application time is stored in a multirange column. When application time is stored in a range type column, zero, one or two temporal leftovers are produced by each row that is updated/deleted. With a multirange column, only zero or one temporal leftover is produced. The leftover bounds are computed using range_minus_multi and multirange_minus_multi (see ). The bounds given to FOR PORTION OF must be constant. Functions like now() are allowed, but column references are not. When temporal leftovers are inserted, all INSERT triggers are fired, but permission checks for inserting rows are skipped. In READ COMMITTED mode, temporal updates and deletes can yield unexpected results when they concurrently touch the same row. It is possible to lose all or part of the second update or delete. The scenario is illustrated in . Session 2 searches for rows to change, and it finds one that Session 1 has already modified. It waits for Session 1 to commit. Then it re-checks whether the row still matches its search criteria (including the start/end times targeted by FOR PORTION OF ). Session 1 may have changed those times so that they no longer qualify. In addition, the temporal leftovers inserted by Session 1 are not visible within Session 2's transaction, because they are not yet committed. Therefore there is nothing for Session 2 to update/delete: neither the modified row nor the leftovers. The portion of history that Session 2 intended to change is not affected. Temporal Isolation Example To solve these problems, precede every temporal update/delete with a SELECT FOR UPDATE matching the same criteria (including the targeted portion of application time). That way the actual update/delete doesn't begin until the lock is held, and all concurrent leftovers will be visible. In higher transaction isolation levels, this lock is not required. Returning Data from Modified Rows RETURNING INSERT RETURNING UPDATE RETURNING DELETE RETURNING MERGE RETURNING Sometimes it is useful to obtain data from modified rows while they are being manipulated. The INSERT , UPDATE , DELETE , and MERGE commands all have an optional RETURNING clause that supports this. Use of RETURNING avoids performing an extra database query to collect the data, and is especially valuable when it would otherwise be difficult to identify the modified rows reliably. The allowed contents of a RETURNING clause are the same as a SELECT command's output list (see ). It can contain column names of the command's target table, or value expressions using those columns. A common shorthand is RETURNING * , which selects all columns of the target table in order. In an INSERT , the default data available to RETURNING is the row as it was inserted. This is not so useful in trivial inserts, since it would just repeat the data provided by the client. But it can be very handy when relying on computed default values. For example, when using a serial column to provide unique identifiers, RETURNING can return the ID assigned to a new row: CREATE TABLE users (firstname text, lastname text, id serial PRIMARY KEY); INSERT INTO users (firstname, lastname) VALUES ('Joe', 'Cool') RETURNING id; The RETURNING clause is also very useful with INSERT ... SELECT . In an UPDATE , the default data available to RETURNING is the new content of the modified row. For example: UPDATE products SET price = price * 1.10 WHERE price = 99.99 RETURNING name, price AS new_price; In a DELETE , the default data available to RETURNING is the content of the deleted row. For example: DELETE FROM products WHERE obsoletion_date = 'today' RETURNING *; In a MERGE , the default data available to RETURNING is the content of the source row plus the content of the inserted, updated, or deleted target row. Since it is quite common for the source and target to have many of the same columns, specifying RETURNING * can lead to a lot of duplicated columns, so it is often more useful to qualify it so as to return just the source or target row. For example: MERGE INTO products p USING new_products n ON p.product_no = n.product_no WHEN NOT MATCHED THEN INSERT VALUES (n.product_no, n.name, n.price) WHEN MATCHED THEN UPDATE SET name = n.name, price = n.price RETURNING p.*; In each of these commands, it is also possible to explicitly return the old and new content of the modified row. For example: UPDATE products SET price = price * 1.10 WHERE price = 99.99 RETURNING name, old.price AS old_price, new.price AS new_price, new.price - old.price AS price_change; In this example, writing new.price is the same as just writing price , but it makes the meaning clearer. This syntax for returning old and new values is available in INSERT , UPDATE , DELETE , and MERGE commands, but typically old values will be NULL for an INSERT , and new values will be NULL for a DELETE . However, there are situations where it can still be useful for those commands. For example, in an INSERT with an ON CONFLICT DO SELECT/UPDATE clause, the old values will be non- NULL for conflicting rows. Similarly, if a DELETE is turned into an UPDATE by a rewrite rule , the new values may be non- NULL . If there are triggers ( ) on the target table, the data available to RETURNING is the row as modified by the triggers. Thus, inspecting columns computed by triggers is another common use-case for RETURNING .